Anorexia nervosa

Anorexia nervosa, often simply called anorexia, is a treatable eating disorder in which people have a low body weight based on personal weight history. Although many people with anorexia look very thin, some may not look thin and others may look overweight. But they've actually lost weight or failed to gain needed weight.
People who have anorexia often have a strong fear of gaining weight and may think they're overweight, even when they're thin. To prevent weight gain or continue to lose weight, people with anorexia often limit the amount or type of food they eat. They place a high value on controlling their weight and shape and use extreme efforts that can greatly harm their lives.
Anorexia can cause changes in the brain due to very poor nutrition, also called malnutrition. This is when people don't get the nutrients that their bodies need to stay healthy. So it's not a choice to continue the risky and damaging behavior.
If left untreated, weight loss can get to a point where people with anorexia are at high risk of serious physical harm or death. Anorexia has the second-highest death rate of any mental illness, surpassed only by opioid overdoses. Most deaths related to anorexia stem from heart conditions and suicide.
Anorexia, like other eating disorders, can take over people's lives and be very hard to overcome. Because it's related to changes in the brain, anorexia behaviors are not choices, and the illness is not really about food or looking a certain way. With proven treatment, people with anorexia can return to a healthy weight, develop more-balanced eating habits, and reverse some of anorexia's serious medical and mental health complications.

Symptoms:
The physical and behavioral symptoms of anorexia nervosa relate to how starvation affects the brain. It may be hard to notice symptoms because what is seen as a low body weight differs for each person. Some people with anorexia may not look very thin. Also, people often hide their thinness, eating habits or physical problems.

Physical symptoms:
Physical symptoms of anorexia nervosa may include irregular heart rhythms, low blood pressure and dehydration. Dehydration happens when your body doesn't have enough water and other fluids to carry out normal functions. Your fingers may look blue and you may have dry skin. You may notice a change in your skin color, such as yellowing of the skin. You may have hair that thins, breaks or falls out. You also may have soft, downy hair covering your body.
Other physical symptoms include:
Extreme weight loss or not making expected weight gains based on age.
Being very tired and weak.
Dizziness or fainting.
Having a hard time passing stool and having stomach pain.
Not able to stand the cold, or feeling cold when others feel fine.
Swelling of the arms or legs.
Wearing away of the teeth and calluses on your knuckles from causing yourself to vomit.
Stomachaches.
Never feeling hungry or feeling hungry and getting full right away after eating a very small portion.
Having a hard time concentrating or focusing.
Low mood.
Increased anxiety.
Stress fractures or reduced bone mass.
If you're female and not taking a contraceptive, you may not have menstrual periods.

Emotional and behavioral symptoms:
You may have an extreme focus on food. Sometimes this includes cooking meals for others but not eating those meals. You may skip meals or refuse to eat. You also may severely limit the amount of food you eat through dieting or fasting, not admit to being hungry, or make excuses for not eating.
When you eat, you may eat only a few certain "safe" foods — often foods low in fat and calories. You also may focus too much on eating "clean" or healthy and stop eating specific types of food in a way that has not been recommended by a healthcare professional. You may take on rigid meal or eating habits, such as spitting out food after chewing. You may not want to eat in public. You also may lie about how much food you've eaten.
You may have a type of anorexia where you binge and purge like with bulimia. Binges are when you feel like you can't control what or how much you eat. Binges can sometimes be large amounts of food. But overall, if you have the binge-purge type of anorexia, you eat much less than you need. Purges are when you make yourself vomit, or you misuse enemas, laxatives, diuretics, diet aids or herbal products to get rid of food that you ate. You lose too much weight and have very low body weight, compared with your personal weight history.
Other emotional and behavioral symptoms of anorexia may include:
Too much exercise. This includes exercising when you're injured, instead of doing something you value or enjoy, or exercising to such a degree of intensity that it's notably different from the people around you.
Fear of weight gain. Being scared to gain weight may include the need to weigh or measure your body over and over again.
Focus on appearance. This includes checking in the mirror often for what you think are flaws and wearing layers of clothing to cover up.
Concern about being overweight. This includes concerns about being fat or having parts of the body that are fat.
Emotional changes. You may lack emotion or feel emotionally flat. You may not want to be social. You also could be angry or irritable. You may have little interest in sex.
Trouble sleeping. This also is known as insomnia.
You also may hurt yourself. Or you may think or talk about suicide or attempt suicide.

When to see a doctor:
Because of how malnutrition affects the brain, someone with anorexia may not want to be treated. A core feature of anorexia is that people with the eating disorder usually don't see how serious their symptoms are. This is because of the way anorexia affects the brain.
If someone in your life has anorexia, it's better to take action — even if you think it could be an overreaction — rather than let symptoms continue. Early treatment of eating disorders leads to the best outcomes.
If you're worried about a loved one, urge your loved one to talk to a healthcare professional. If you're a parent or caregiver who is concerned about your child's eating habits, weight or body image, share your concerns with your child's healthcare professional.
