Bulimia nervosa

Bulimia nervosa, commonly called bulimia, is a serious, potentially life-threatening eating disorder. People with bulimia binge eat. This means people feel like they've lost control over their eating. They eat large amounts of food in one sitting. This often occurs in secret, and they often feel very guilty and shameful. Then they try to get rid of the food and extra calories in an unhealthy way, such as vomiting or misusing laxatives. This is called purging.
If you have bulimia, you probably focus on your weight and body shape even when you're trying to think about other things. You may judge yourself severely and harshly for what you see as flaws in your appearance and personality. Bulimia is related to how you see yourself — not just about food. It can be hard to overcome, and it can be dangerous.
It's important to remember that an eating disorder is not something you choose. Bulimia is a complex illness that affects how your brain works and how you make decisions. But effective treatment can help you feel better about yourself, eat healthier and reverse serious complications.

Symptoms:
Living in fear of gaining weight and trying to lose weight in unhealthy ways.
Repeatedly eating unusually large amounts of food in one sitting.
Feeling a loss of control during binge eating. You may feel like you can't stop eating or can't control what you eat.
Vomiting on purpose or exercising to extremes after binge eating so that you don't gain weight.
Using medicines that make you urinate, called water pills or diuretics, or laxatives or enemas to pass stool when they're not needed.
Fasting, limiting calories or not eating certain foods between binges.
Using dietary supplements or herbal products for weight loss. These products can be dangerous.
Being very unhappy with your body shape and weight.
Letting your body shape and weight guide how you feel about yourself and your worth.
Having extreme mood swings.
People with bulimia may use different methods to purge. The severity of bulimia depends on the number of times a week that you purge and the problems caused by doing so.

When to see a doctor:
If you have any bulimia symptoms, seek medical help right away. If left untreated, bulimia can severely affect your physical and mental health.
Talk to your primary healthcare professional or a mental health professional about your bulimia symptoms and feelings. If you're not sure if you want to seek treatment, talk to someone about what you're going through. This could be a friend or loved one, a teacher, a faith leader, or someone else you trust. This person can help you take the first steps to get help.
