Mental disorders page

Headline- Mental disorders and their information.

Short Intro: A mental disorder is characterized by a clinically significant disturbance in an individual’s cognition, emotional regulation, or behaviour.  It is usually associated with distress or impairment in important areas of functioning. There are many different types of mental disorders.  Mental disorders may also be referred to as mental health conditions. The latter is a broader term covering mental disorders, psychosocial disabilities and (other) mental states associated with significant distress, impairment in functioning, or risk of self-harm. 

Depressive disorder: Depressive disorder (also known as depression) is a common mental disorder. It involves a depressed mood or loss of pleasure or interest in activities for long periods of time. Depression is different from regular mood changes and feelings about everyday life. It can affect all aspects of life, including relationships with family, friends and community. It can result from or lead to problems at school and at work. Depression can happen to anyone. People who have lived through abuse, severe losses or other stressful events are more likely to develop depression. Women are more likely to have depression than men.
more information- Depressive disorder page

Bipolar Disorder: The condition is primarily observed among working-age people, but also in youth. While the prevalence of bipolar disorder among men and women is approximately equal, available data indicate that women are more often diagnosed. Bipolar disorder is a mental health condition characterized by mood swings from one extreme to another. During a manic episode, a person experiences an extremely high mood with lots of energy (feeling very happy, excited, overactive). They may have a sense of euphoria, sudden shifts in mood or an excess of emotion (uncontrollable laughing or feeling much more irritable, agitated or restless than usual).
more information- Bipolar disorder page

Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD): Many people feel extreme fear during or after witnessing or experiencing potentially traumatic events, such as war, accidents, natural disasters or sexual violence. Most people exposed to such events will experience distress but will recover naturally with time. Some people continue to experience a range of mental health conditions that can persist for months or even years, including PTSD, depressive disorders, anxiety disorders and substance use disorders.
more information- Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) page

Schizophrenia: Schizophrenia is characterised by significant impairments in the way reality is perceived and changes in behaviour related to persistent delusions, hallucinations, experiences of influence, disorganized thinking; “negative symptoms” such as very limited speech, restricted experience and expression of emotions, inability to experience interest or pleasure, and social withdrawal; and/or 
extreme agitation or slowing of movements, maintenance of unusual postures. Some people with schizophrenia experience worsening and remission of symptoms periodically throughout their lives, others a gradual worsening of symptoms over time.
more information- Schizophrenia page

Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD): Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) features a pattern of unwanted thoughts and fears known as obsessions. These obsessions lead you to do repetitive behaviors, also called compulsions. These obsessions and compulsions get in the way of daily activities and cause a lot of distress. Ultimately, you feel driven to do compulsive acts to ease your stress. Even if you try to ignore or get rid of bothersome thoughts or urges, they keep coming back. This leads you to act based on ritual. This is the vicious cycle of OCD.
more information- Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) page

Attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD): Adult attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a mental health disorder that includes a combination of persistent problems, such as difficulty paying attention, hyperactivity and impulsive behavior. Adult ADHD can lead to unstable relationships, poor work or school performance, low self-esteem, and other problems.Diagnosis of ADHD in adults can be difficult because certain ADHD symptoms are similar to those caused by other conditions, such as anxiety or mood disorders. And many adults with ADHD also have at least one other mental health condition, such as depression or anxiety.
more information- Attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) page

Autism spectrum disorder (ASD): Autism spectrum disorder is a condition related to brain development that impacts how a person perceives and socializes with others, causing problems in social interaction and communication. The disorder also includes limited and repetitive patterns of behavior. The term "spectrum" in autism spectrum disorder refers to the wide range of symptoms and severity. Autism spectrum disorder includes conditions that were previously considered separate — autism, Asperger's syndrome, childhood disintegrative disorder and an unspecified form of pervasive developmental disorder. Some people still use the term "Asperger's syndrome," which is generally thought to be at the mild end of autism spectrum disorder.
more information- Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) page

Anorexia nervosa: Anorexia nervosa, often simply called anorexia, is a treatable eating disorder in which people have a low body weight based on personal weight history. Although many people with anorexia look very thin, some may not look thin and others may look overweight. But they've actually lost weight or failed to gain needed weight. People who have anorexia often have a strong fear of gaining weight and may think they're overweight, even when they're thin. To prevent weight gain or continue to lose weight, people with anorexia often limit the amount or type of food they eat. They place a high value on controlling their weight and shape and use extreme efforts that can greatly harm their lives.
more information- Anorexia nervosa page

Bulimia nervosa: Bulimia nervosa, commonly called bulimia, is a serious, potentially life-threatening eating disorder. People with bulimia binge eat. This means people feel like they've lost control over their eating. They eat large amounts of food in one sitting. This often occurs in secret, and they often feel very guilty and shameful. Then they try to get rid of the food and extra calories in an unhealthy way, such as vomiting or misusing laxatives. This is called purging. If you have bulimia, you probably focus on your weight and body shape even when you're trying to think about other things. You may judge yourself severely and harshly for what you see as flaws in your appearance and personality. Bulimia is related to how you see yourself — not just about food. It can be hard to overcome, and it can be dangerous.
more information- Bulimia nervosa page
